um so first of all address the anti
depressants thing there's nothing wrong
with it be careful though because
sometimes they can make you a little bit
nauseous so actually talk to your doctor
the first thing I did was I went to my
primary care physician she prescribed
lexapro people have mixed feelings about
taking medication about taking
antidepressants I tried them like many
years ago and had a good experience so I
was open to trying this again thinking
that it would be another good experience
now drugs have been used for mental
health problems for a long time
prescription drugs have been very
popular for at least the whole of the
20th century but up until the nineteen
fifties in 1960s drugs that were used in
this way were not seen as rectifying a
chemical imbalance even the drugs that
were prescribed for mental health
problems were generally seen as buffers
or Downers sedatives or stimulants
antidepressants are really very little
different from placebos if you look at
if you look at all the literature if you
get hold of the unpublished studies the
difference is minimal it's tiny it's
probably to my mind accounted for by the
fact that as I was saying if you're
doing a placebo controlled study with a
mind also that against a mind-altering
substance you're not that's not really a
fair comparison it's not blinded people
are going to know what they're taking
that fits with a fact that actually the
use of antidepressants haven't really
altered the outcome of depression which
is still pretty poor if you look at
people who are receiving treatment for
depression so it for example the large
star D study done in the United States
only three percent of the people in that
study who were all treated with at least
one and many of them with numerous
antidepressants actually recovered and
remained well over the year follow-up
period and lots of studies have shown
that people who with depression who take
antidepressants don't do any better in
fact
usually do rather worse than people with
depression who don't take them I did not
have a good experience it worked at
first it worked for the first maybe
three or four months I noticed I didn't
have any panic attacks during that time
which was amazing because it was kind of
oh man it was it was getting really bad
there for me for awhile and month five I
noticed that the the effect of the drug
was kind of wearing off I started
getting panic attacks again when the
amphetamines came in and in the 1940s
they were advertised as pet pills they
would make you smarter and sassier when
the barbiturates came in they were
advertised as sedatives as Downers as
things that would send you to sleep and
this was because until about the mid
20th century no one thought there was
much that could really be done for
mental health problems but that all
changed from the 1940s with the
introduction of these heroic procedures
into psychiatry which some of some of
you may have heard of you all have heard
or crook as one of them of course with
ECT another one which came in in the
1940s was in stood in a coma therapy and
of course there was lobotomy and and
other techniques and some of these
procedures particularly insulin coma
therapy and ECT came to be thought of as
acting in a specific way on the
underlying disease in a way that no
previous widely accepted treatment had
done before of course most of these
procedures particularly insulin coma
therapy were since found to be
completely useless as well as being very
dangerous it had a death rate of about
10% so by the time modern drugs arrived
in the early 1950s
the point is that psychiatry already
believed it had some specific treatments
and treatments that were actually
treating the disease in some way when
the drugs when modern drugs first came
in the first one that was introduced was
the first drug we still use that was
called was chlorpromazine Marg a pill
Thorazine I'm sure you would have heard
of it they were very popular and there
you spread rapidly throughout the old
mental hospitals in Europe and America
helped in America by a massive
pharmaceutical company aided promotion
campaign which included the chief
executive of the company going on
national primetime television to
announce this great medical breakthrough
but despite the fact that they weren't
very popular they were not at first seen
as acting in a specific or targeted way
in a way that they are now being
promoted as acting so the first two
psychiatrists who use Crowe promazine
were called delay and denickers on delay
PA tenneco who were both working in
Paris and they believe that
chlorpromazine and other early
antipsychotics were essentially special
sorts of sedative different from the
sedatives they'd had before but but
sedatives things that worked on the new
nervous system to suppress or dampen it
in some way lots of adverts advertised
these drugs for all sorts of conditions
so they were advertised for anxiety they
were advertised for behavior problems in
children they were widely promoted at
this time for the agitation and
aggression in elderly people what
they've been used for and criticised for
being useful recently of course by 1970
this is an advert for nineteen set for
mineral in 1970 that's all changed and
it's now being advertised as targeting
specific symptoms of psychosis and
schizophrenia and you get the same sort
of story with antidepressants the first
drugs that were called antidepressants
were essentially stimulant type drugs
drugs that we use to treat TB that had
stimulant effects and were known to send
people psychotic incidentally so quite
similar to amphetamines and first of all
they were described as stimulants but
gradually they started to be
distinguished from stimulants and to be
called antidepressants and to be claimed
to be doing something specific in the
condition of depressions and I noticed
that things that normally would excite
me and make me happy
weren't really doing that as much it was
I just felt kind of like I was becoming
numb to the world I went back to my
doctor and I told her how the drug was
affecting me and how I was I didn't like
the way it made me feel how it wasn't
even really effective anymore and how it
was making me gain weight the solution
to me saying I don't like the way this
drug is affecting me was to double the
dose she was like okay well right now
you're only on 10 milligrams we're gonna
just go ahead and up back to 20 be the
way that drugs used to be understood as
working in the way that I'm suggesting
they should be understood as working the
drugs that we currently have at any rate
is what I call this drug centered model
and this is the idea that far from
normalizing the body or the brain the
drugs that we use actually create an
abnormal or an altered state they are
mind and body altering substances that
of course is what a drug is for the but
psychiatric drugs are mind-altering
that's the really important property
that they have they are an example of a
psychoactive substance psychoactive
substances of course also include
recreational drugs like alcohol nicotine
the important point is that this change
did not happen because a whole load of
studies were done which proved that what
drugs were really doing was reversing
underlying diseases or abnormalities or
in chemical imbalances there wasn't any
that there was no scientific research
set up then and there's almost no
scientific research now to demonstrate
that the disease centered model is the
correct way of thinking I think this
change occurred because people wanted it
to to occur because psychiatrist wanted
it to occur because they desperately
wanted to have to be able to offer real
medical treatments that made a real
difference to a - to what they were
suggesting was an underlying disease
process
it also happened because it was
politically expedient the idea that
there were drug treatments that could
cure people was was very helpful to
politicians who wanted to empty out and
close down the old asylums and to to
pretend is that issues that were raised
by mental disturbance mental disorders
had been solved I had just sat there and
explained how uncomfortable it was
making me and all these negative side
effects and the you know solution was
take more of it take more of that thing
that is making you feel like [ __ ] so I
went to a new doctor that agreed that
taking it was maybe not the best option
for me she gave me a very low dose and a
very small amount of xanax klonopin is
another barbiturate that people can get
prescribed for panic attacks and things
like that but it's a longer-lasting drug
and you kind of just take it every day
and I told her I don't really want to be
reliant on a medication I don't want to
take something every day xanax I know is
dangerous because it can be very
addictive to people I'm not the kind of
person that has an addictive personality
so I'm not worried about it I've had the
prescription now for like a month and
I've taken three so what what might
constitute it I just want to think think
about evidence for a couple of minutes
although I'm not going to go into it in
great detail there's lots of stuff in my
book and things on the web that I've
written as well if you want more
references the first point to make is
that the vast majority of evidence that
is held up to support the idea that
psychiatric drugs work does not
distinguish how they work because that
evidence is placebo controlled trials if
you compare a mind-altering substance
with a placebo obviously people are
going to feel and behave and act and
think differently so the fact that there
are some changes in a mania rating scale
or depression rating scale or a
psychosis rating scale or anything else
doesn't indicate that that drug has had
any fundamental effect on an underlying
process I think a really important thing
is to realize that drugs can't do
anything and everything
so this is just a random list of some
effects that that that psychoactive
mind-altering drugs produce some of them
produce euphoria make people get in
high that's not the same thing as making
people happy so I think I think it's
really important to not to just equate
the effects of drugs with all with other
experiences just think a bit about what
the familiar drugs that are used in
psychiatry aren't doing and I'm sure you
can probably tell me more about this but
I can tell you what's interesting is
that these early psychiatrists described
what antipsychotic were the early
antipsychotics my chlorpromazine were
doing to people in a lot of detail and
what's interesting about that is that
that the interest that they had been how
these drugs affected and altered and
changed people has been lost you won't
find an account of how Cyprus that
changes people in this sort of way in
the modern literature at all except what
I've managed to publish but they were
there they were pretty honest about it
okay quarantine makes people in
different delays their responses
decreases initiative and preoccupation
without quite just sending two people to
sleep like the barbiturates did that's
what they they noticed but I know that
there's more there's more to it than
that there's more in my life that I need
to you know this is like a band-aid
this helps prevent a serious panic
attack once it started but I want to get
to the point in my life where I don't
feel those feelings to begin with and I
think the only way to do that is
behavioral therapy
my doctor did mention that there are
other types of antidepressants that I
might consider in the future that don't
cause weight gain I think wellbutrin is
one luvox is one you know so there's
there are other options Danika went even
further than this and he suggested that
what the drugs were doing was replacing
the psychosis or schizophrenia with a
neurological syndrome a neurological
disease which was pretty similar to
Parkinson's disease if you push the dose
up you've got all the sort of Frank
symptoms of Parkinson's very very stiff
and very slowed up but lower doses you
just got primarily the mental symptoms
the mental slowing and the emotional
flattening and he said this you know
this is how they work this is this is
what we're what we're intending to do
we're trying to make people a bit
Parkinson like and that fits with what
people say about the drug in people's
people's experiences of certainly of the
older antipsychotics people describe
them as making them feel stagnant and
heavy and slow and emotionally dampened
or emotionally empty some of the newer
drugs are a little bit different so I
think olanzapine and clozapine are a
little bit different they still have
this effect of inducing lethargy and
emotional indifference but this seems to
be associated less with sort of physical
rigidity and restriction and more with
metabolic effect so people get this real
compulsion to to eat and of course this
was you know this information was was
suppressed for a long time but I think
this crave sums it up nicely I've never
been able to eat as much as I did when I
was on zyprexa I gained 40 pounds in no
time and my mind was in a constant fog
of lethargy and indifference I didn't
care about anything I just wanted to sit
around and eat lots of adverse effects
of antipsychotics that I'm sure you're
probably aware of
just a couple of things I want to say
that I think don't come out strongly in
the literature
tardive dyskinesia it's a neurological
condition it consisted of abnormal
involuntary movements
that's what's highlighted but actually
there's quite a lot of evidence that
there's some mental impairment
associated with it as well there's been
more evidence recently about reduced
brain volume I was talking to someone
before I started about Peter Bregenz
work
I read Peter Breggin stocks excitatory
when it came out in the early 90s and I
thought this is really interesting but
he's going too far it just can't be true
that the drugs cause you know cause
brain shrinkage and these large
ventricles he's just totally over the
top recent evidence shows that he was
almost certainly right the there's there
was a big trial in America that showed
that had a paradigm and olanzapine
caused visible shrinkage of the brain
within weeks there was a study on
macaque monkeys that showed that both of
those drugs caused the monkeys to have
smaller brains and there's been a
long-term follow-up recently that that
shows the same thing the more
antipsychotics you're on the more brain
the more the brain diminishes in volume
over time wellbutrin as one luvox as one
you know so there's there are other
options and we'll see how I fare with
therapy and just doing what I'm doing
and exercise and you know keep doing my
thing and if I need to go on that at
some point I will update you and let you
know if I have negative side effects or
my experience with that what are more
antidepressants in terms of sort of
psychoactive and physical effects that
they have tricyclic antidepressants are
very similar drugs to chlorpromazine so
they're very sedative and not very nice
to take and of course slowing up with
mental processes and some of them have
some of these neurological effects at
higher doses newer antidepressants
have much weaker psychoactive effects so
they don't actually make everyone feel
that different but they do have some
psychoactive effects and these are some
of them they seem to have this odd
capacity that drugs like the SSRIs and
venlafaxine which I looked at recently
of making people feel both a little bit
lethargic and some people also feeling a
bit sort of tense and hyper and
irritable as well and they also seem to
definitely have this capacity to make
people feel emotionally a bit numbed or
distant as far as treating depression is
concerned there's really no evidence
that any drug has any has the ability to
reverse depression or to make people's
mood any better there are lots of drugs
that can make you high temporarily but
that's not the same thing
but there are drugs with psychoactive
effects that can suppress emotions
generally but that's not the same thing
but essentially what I'm saying is what
most people are being told these days or
for a long time have been told about
antidepressants is that you should take
them because they will help normalize
your serotonin levels that is just not
true there's just no evidence to support
that at all